.TH AUTOSCROLL 1 "2026-07-23" "1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
autoscroll \- system-wide Windows-style middle-click autoscroll for Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B autoscroll
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBautoscroll\fR provides system-wide Windows-style middle-click autoscroll
for Linux. It works on X11, GNOME Wayland, KDE Wayland, wlroots-based
compositors (cosmic\-comp, Sway, Hyprland), Gamescope, and Weston.

The daemon grabs mouse input devices via evdev (EVIOCGRAB) and creates a
virtual uinput output device. When the middle button is pressed and held,
pointer movement causes scrolling proportional to the distance from the
anchor point. Quick press+release within the deadzone passes through as a
normal middle-click (paste preserved).

Two scroll modes are available:
.TP
.B Rate mode (default)
Scroll speed follows \(lqnotches/sec = gain \(mu distance\(upexponent\(rq,
capped at max_speed. Continues scrolling while held even if the pointer
stops moving.
.TP
.B Position mode
Scrolls only while actively moving, roughly 1:1 with pointer motion.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "Scroll behavior:"
.TP
.B \-m, \-\-mode=\fIrate|position\fR
Scroll feel (default: rate)
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-deadzone=\fIPX\fR
Deadzone (px) before scroll starts. While the pointer stays within this
radius of the anchor, no scrolling occurs. (default: 18)
.TP
.B \-g, \-\-gain=\fIFLOAT\fR
Rate-mode speed factor. Multiplied against \fBdistance\(upexponent\fR to
compute notches/second. (default: 0.020)
.TP
.B \-e, \-\-exponent=\fIFLOAT\fR
Rate-mode curve exponent. Higher values make scrolling ramp up faster with
distance. (default: 1.30)
.TP
.B \-\-max\-speed=\fIFLOAT\fR
Rate-mode notches/sec cap. Prevents runaway scrolling. (default: 40.0)
.TP
.B \-p, \-\-position\-factor=\fIFLOAT\fR
Position-mode sensitivity. Multiplied against pointer delta to convert
pixels to scroll notches. (default: 0.06)
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-tick=\fIMS\fR
Rate-mode tick interval in milliseconds. Controls scroll update rate.
Lower = smoother but more CPU. (default: 15)
.TP
.B \-H, \-\-no\-horizontal
Disable horizontal scrolling. Only vertical scroll events are emitted.
.TP
.B \-\-invert\-v
Flip vertical scroll direction. Moving the mouse up scrolls down and
vice versa.
.TP
.B \-\-invert\-h
Flip horizontal scroll direction.
.SS "Device selection:"
.TP
.B \-L, \-\-list\-devices
List available input devices (shows /dev/input/eventN paths and names).
Useful for finding the right device path or name regex. Exits after listing.
.TP
.B \-D, \-\-device=\fIPATH\fR
Pin a specific /dev/input/eventN device. Skips device discovery and
regex matching. Useful when the automatic name regex matches the wrong
device.
.TP
.B \-\-match\-name=\fIREGEX\fR
Device name filter regex (POSIX extended, case-insensitive).
(default: none — matches all pointing devices)
.SS "Runtime:"
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-foreground
Don't daemonize. Stay in the foreground (useful for testing with \-v).
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Log state transitions to stderr. Shows IDLE/HELD/SCROLLING state changes
and distance values.
.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
Print version string and exit.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print help text and exit.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration is read from \fB/etc/autoscroll.conf\fR (INI-style). CLI flags
override config file values. The file is optional \(em defaults apply if it
doesn't exist.

Example /etc/autoscroll.conf:
.RS
.nf
mode = rate
deadzone = 18
gain = 0.020
exponent = 1.30
max_speed = 40.0
tick_ms = 15
position_factor = 0.06
horizontal = true
invert_v = false
invert_h = false
match_name = (?i)mouse
.RE
.SH INTERACTIVE BEHAVIOR
.PP
The autoscroll state machine:
.IP 1. 3
Press and hold middle button \(-> anchor is set at current cursor position
.IP 2. 3
Move pointer while holding \(-> scroll speed proportional to distance from anchor
.IP 3. 3
Release middle button \(-> scrolling stops, normal mode resumes
.IP 4. 3
Quick press+release within deadzone \(-> passes through as normal middle-click
(paste preserved)
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run in foreground with verbose logging:
    autoscroll \-f \-v
.TP
Use position mode with larger deadzone:
    autoscroll \-m position \-d 30
.TP
List available input devices:
    autoscroll \-L
.TP
Pin a specific device:
    autoscroll \-D /dev/input/event5
.TP
Use a custom device match:
    autoscroll \-\-match-name \(dqLogitech\(dq
.SH FILES
.TP
\fI/etc/autoscroll.conf\fR
Optional configuration file (INI-style)
.TP
\fI/usr/lib/systemd/system/autoscroll.service\fR
Systemd service unit (installed via package)
.TP
\fI/usr/lib/udev/rules.d/99-autoscroll.rules\fR
udev rules for /dev/uinput permissions
.SH KNOWN CAVEATS
.PP
\fBCursor freezes during autoscroll:\fR
Pointer REL events are suppressed while autoscrolling \(em the cursor
won't move. This is intentional and matches Windows autoscroll behavior.
.PP
\fBCursor jumps on exit:\fR
When autoscroll ends, the compositor catches up with accumulated relative
motion. The cursor may jump. Same behavior as Windows.
.PP
\fBNo visual feedback:\fR
Wayland does not expose a cursor icon API from userspace. Check status
via \fBjournalctl \-u autoscroll\fR.
.PP
\fBGame grab conflicts:\fR
If a game has grabbed the mouse (EVIOCGRAB EBUSY), the device is skipped.
Run \fBautoscroll \-L\fR to see available devices.
.PP
\fBSELinux/AppArmor (Fedora):\fR
Enforcing policies may block uinput. Use \fBaudit2allow\fR to generate the
necessary SELinux policy module.
.PP
\fBMinimum kernel:\fR
Linux 5.0+ required for REL_WHEEL_HI_RES. Older kernels fall back to
discrete REL_WHEEL events.
.SH NOTES
.PP
The daemon must run as root to access /dev/uinput. The provided systemd
service uses DevicePolicy=closed for sandboxing (only /dev/uinput and
input devices are accessible).
.PP
Quick press+release of the middle button (within the deadzone) passes
through as a normal middle-click for paste.
.PP
To debug: run \fBautoscroll \-f \-v\fR as root. State transitions and
device discovery are logged to stderr.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR https://github.com/talos/autoscroll-linux
.SH AUTHOR
autoscroll-linux contributors
